Improve the release checklist based on experience with v0.13.0 release (#3374)
GenericMappingTools/pygmt: .github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/4-release_checklist.md

**Release**: [v0.x.x](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/milestones/?)
**Scheduled Date**: YYYY/MM/DD
**Pull request due date**: YYYY/MM/DD
**DOI**: `10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX`

**Priority PRs/issues to complete prior to release**

- [ ] Wrap X ()
- [ ] Wrap Y ()

**Before release**:

- [ ] Check [SPEC 0](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/) to see if we need to bump the minimum supported versions of GMT, Python and core package dependencies (NumPy/Pandas/Xarray)

> - [ ] Review the ["PyGMT Team" page](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/team.html)

Author: Review the PyGMT team as early as possible so that we have more time for discussions.

- [ ] Check to ensure that:

>   - [ ] Deprecations and related tests are removed for this version by running `grep --include="*.py" -r vX.Y.Z` from the base of the repository

Author: Check deprecations as early as possible, so that we don't have to check workflow runs after removing deprecated codes and tests.

- [ ] Wrap Y ()

**Before release**:

- [ ] Check [SPEC 0](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/) to see if we need to bump the minimum supported versions of GMT, Python and core package dependencies (NumPy/Pandas/Xarray)
- [ ] Review the ["PyGMT Team" page](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/team.html)
- [ ] Check to ensure that:
  - [ ] Deprecations and related tests are removed for this version by running `grep --include="*.py" -r vX.Y.Z` from the base of the repository
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["GMT Legacy Tests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_tests_legacy.yaml)
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["GMT Dev Tests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_tests_dev.yaml)
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["Doctests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_doctests.yaml)
- [ ] Update warnings in `pygmt/_show_versions.py` as well as notes in
      [Not working transparency](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/install.html#not-working-transparency)
      regarding GMT-Ghostscript incompatibility
- [ ] Reserve a DOI on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) by clicking on "New Version"

> - [ ] Finish up the "Changelog entry for v0.x.x" Pull Request (Use the previous changelog PR as a reference)

Author: Previously, this task has many smaller tasks:
```
  - [ ] Add a new entry in `doc/_static/version_switch.js` for documentation switcher
  - [ ] Update `CITATION.cff` and BibTeX at https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt#citing-pygmt
    - [ ] Update authorship list
    - [ ] Update DOI (and url for BibTeX)
    - [ ] Update version
    - [ ] Update date released
  - [ ] Add the documentation link `doc/minversions.md`
  - [ ] Add minimum required version information `doc/minversions.md`
  - [ ] Copy draft changelog from Release Drafter and edit it to look nice ([see maintainers guide for details](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/maintenance.html#updating-the-changelog))
```
Based on my experience with making releases, I usually use the previous changelog PR as a reference. For example, when releasing v0.13.0 in #3425, I used the v0.12.0 PR #3201 as reference. I feel we can move these subtasks from the release checklist to the release PR. So, when releasing v0.14.0, we will use #3425 as a reference.

> - [ ] Run `make codespell` to check common misspellings. If there are any, either fix them or add them to `ignore-words-list` in `pyproject.toml`

Author: Check misspelling after finishing the changlog, just in case we introduce new typos in changelog.

> - [ ] Draft the announcement on https://hackmd.io/@pygmt

Author: Start to draft the announcement when we work on the changelog, so that we can finish the announcement as early as possible after making a release.

**Release**:

- [ ] At the [PyGMT release page on GitHub](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/releases):
  - [ ] Edit the draft release notes with the finalized changelog
  - [ ] Set the tag version and release title to vX.Y.Z

>   - [ ] Make sure "Set as the latests release" and "Create a discussion for this release" are selected

Author: "Create a discussion for this release" is a new option after we enable the project "Discussions". See https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/discussions/3426 for an example.

Reviewer: I don't think we should enable discussions for this repo, best to keep everything on the forum to avoid having too many places to monitor.

Author: Are you suggesting (1) Disabling announcements for releases in the "Discussions" page or (2) Disabling the entire ["Discussions" page](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/discussions)?

I'm OK with (1). I prefer to keep the "Discussions" page for non-issue discussions. For example, we may need to discuss the expected release date for v0.14.0, but I don't want to open an issue for it; some issues may be better moved for "Discussions" (e.g., https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/issues/3398).

Reviewer: > Are you suggesting (1) Disabling announcements for releases in the "Discussions" page or (2) Disabling the entire ["Discussions" page](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/discussions)?

I'd prefer (2) actually - disable a PyGMT-specific discussion page. Less things to keep track of :slightly_smiling_face:

> some technical discussions may be better moved to "Discussions" (e.g., #3398).

Issues/discussions like that are rather rare, but I see your point. I've been thinking if we can convert the GMT repo's discussion at https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/gmt/discussions into an organization-wide discussion (see https://docs.github.com/en/organizations/managing-organization-settings/enabling-or-disabling-github-discussions-for-an-organization), and maybe have a `pygmt` specific category there?

Author: The entry is removed in 0708027cfb79507135520205de42862238b0a090.

> I've been thinking if we can convert the GMT repo's discussion at https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/gmt/discussions into an organization-wide discussion (see https://docs.github.com/en/organizations/managing-organization-settings/enabling-or-disabling-github-discussions-for-an-organization), and maybe have a `pygmt` specific category there? I don't have the permissions to do so though.

It seems impossible to subscribe to a specific category. I'm also unsure who will be notified when a discussion is created in the "pygmt" category.

  - [ ] Make a release by clicking the 'Publish Release' button, this will automatically create a tag too

> - [ ] Manually upload the pygmt-vX.Y.Z.zip and baseline-images.zip files to https://zenodo.org/deposit, ensure that it is filed under the correct reserved DOI

Author: @weiji14 One question for you: It seems the zip file downloaded from https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/releases/tag/v0.13.0 has a name like `pygmt-0.13.0.zip`, but the zip file on Zenodo has a name like `pygmt-v0.13.0.zip` (the extra `v`). Did you manually rename `pygmt-0.13.0.zip` to `pygmt-v0.13.0.zip` when you uploaded previous versions?

Reviewer: Yes, good catch. I always needed to rename it to add an extra 'v'.

Author: Any specific reason for the renaming? The zip file is called `pygmt-v0.13.0.zip`, but the directory in the zip file is `pygmt-0.13.0.zip`.

Reviewer: I see that this was included in the original release checklist at https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/pull/446/commits/f2842c03d94fca0826fc42e23426da5cfb0f752c. Can't remember now since it was 4 years ago, but it might be that our tags follow `v0.X.Y`, so I decided to use `pygmt-v0.X.Y.zip` for the filename, and just kept it to be consistent ever since.

Author: Just checked [scipy](https://zenodo.org/records/13352243), [xarray](https://zenodo.org/records/11183201) and [pandas](https://zenodo.org/records/10957263) on Zenodo. It seems they all zenodo register the DOI **after** making a release. Taking pandas as an example, the zip file name is `pandas-dev/pandas-v2.2.2.zip`, and the directory inside is `pydata-xarray-da9ff0a`. So I guess there is no guide about the best names for the zip file and the directory.

I'll mention the renaming in the checklist.

      [Not working transparency](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/install.html#not-working-transparency)
      regarding GMT-Ghostscript incompatibility
- [ ] Reserve a DOI on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) by clicking on "New Version"
- [ ] Finish up the "Changelog entry for v0.x.x" Pull Request (Use the previous changelog PR as a reference)
- [ ] Run `make codespell` to check common misspellings. If there are any, either fix them or add them to `ignore-words-list` in `pyproject.toml`
- [ ] Draft the announcement on https://hackmd.io/@pygmt

**Release**:

- [ ] At the [PyGMT release page on GitHub](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/releases):
  - [ ] Edit the draft release notes with the finalized changelog
  - [ ] Set the tag version and release title to vX.Y.Z
  - [ ] Make sure "Set as the latests release" and "Create a discussion for this release" are selected
  - [ ] Make a release by clicking the 'Publish Release' button, this will automatically create a tag too
- [ ] Manually upload the pygmt-vX.Y.Z.zip and baseline-images.zip files to https://zenodo.org/deposit, ensure that it is filed under the correct reserved DOI

**After release**:

> - [ ] Update conda-forge [pygmt-feedstock](https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock)

Author: If conda-forge's bot takes much longer time to update the package, we can manually trigger the update by opening an issue with the title `@conda-forge-admin, please update version`. See https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock/issues/31 for an example.

Reviewer: I noticed that the manually triggered update at https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock/pull/32/commits/1088e1ab94dede3655e3a253664b91ded65626b1 did not update the pin versions, whereas the auto-update at https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock/pull/30/commits/26a46092c82e1f3408d9beb935a2a8d39f214776 updated the SPEC 0 versions (via [grayskull](https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock/pull/27)).

Not sure if it's a bug on conda-forge's end, but maybe best if we just wait for the bot, and no need to document this `@conda-forge-admin, please update version` trigger here.

**Release**: [v0.x.x](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/milestones/?)

> **Scheduled Date**: YYYY/MM/DD
> **Pull request due date**: YYYY/MM/DD

Author: ```suggestion
**Scheduled Date**: 20YY/MM/DD
**Pull request due date**: 20YY/MM/DD
```

  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["GMT Dev Tests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_tests_dev.yaml)
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["Doctests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_doctests.yaml)
- [ ] Update warnings in `pygmt/_show_versions.py` as well as notes in
      [Not working transparency](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/install.html#not-working-transparency)
      regarding GMT-Ghostscript incompatibility
- [ ] Reserve a DOI on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) by clicking on "New Version"
- [ ] Finish up the "Changelog entry for v0.x.x" Pull Request (Use the previous changelog PR as a reference)
- [ ] Run `make codespell` to check common misspellings. If there are any, either fix them or add them to `ignore-words-list` in `pyproject.toml`
- [ ] Draft the announcement on https://hackmd.io/@pygmt

**Release**:

- [ ] At the [PyGMT release page on GitHub](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/releases):
  - [ ] Edit the draft release notes with the finalized changelog
  - [ ] Set the tag version and release title to vX.Y.Z

>   - [ ] Make sure "Set as the latests release" and "Create a discussion for this release" are selected

Author: ```suggestion
```

  - [ ] Make a release by clicking the 'Publish Release' button, this will automatically create a tag too
- [ ] Download the pygmt-X.Y.Z.zip and baseline-images.zip from the release page,
      rename pygmt-X.Y.Z.zip to pygmt-vX.Y.Z.zip, and upload the two zip files to
      https://zenodo.org/deposit, ensure that they are filed under the correct reserved DOI

**After release**:

- [ ] Update conda-forge [pygmt-feedstock](https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock)

>       [Done automatically by conda-forge's bot, but can also be triggered manually by opening an issue with the title `@conda-forge-admin, please update version`. Remember to pin SPEC0 versions]

Reviewer: Need to remember to manually update the Python version pin, xref https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock/pull/28#issuecomment-1703802989

```suggestion
      [Done automatically by conda-forge's bot. Remember to pin Python and SPEC0 versions]
```

- [ ] Check repositories in `.pre-commit-config.yaml` and see if there are new versions for the pre-commit hooks
- [ ] Check to ensure that:
  - [ ] Deprecations and related tests are removed for this version by running `grep --include="*.py" -r 'remove_version="vX.Y.Z"' pygmt` from the base of the repository
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["GMT Legacy Tests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_tests_legacy.yaml)
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["GMT Dev Tests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_tests_dev.yaml)
  - [ ] All tests pass in the ["Doctests" workflow](https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/actions/workflows/ci_doctests.yaml)
- [ ] Update warnings in `pygmt/_show_versions.py` as well as notes in
      [Not working transparency](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/install.html#not-working-transparency)
      regarding GMT-Ghostscript incompatibility
- [ ] Reserve a DOI on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) by clicking on "New Version"
- [ ] Review the ["PyGMT Team" page](https://www.pygmt.org/dev/team.html)

> - [ ] Finish up 'Changelog entry for v0.x.x' Pull Request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Finish up the "Changelog entry for v0.x.x" Pull Request:
```

**Before release**:
- [ ] Check [SPEC 0](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/) to see if we need to bump the minimum supported versions of GMT, Python and core package dependencies (NumPy/Pandas/Xarray)

> - [ ] Check repositories in `.pre-commit-config.yaml` and see if there are new versions for the pre-commit hooks

Author: Actually, we can run `pre-commit autoupdate` to update the pre-commit hooks

Reviewer: Can remove this entry after #3414 and #3415 since the config will be auto-updated by pre-commit.ci

Author: Already removed in https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/pygmt/pull/3374/commits/aff71d2fb406a9cd0ac33026d19d69bb129fb236

- [ ] Update conda-forge [pygmt-feedstock](https://github.com/conda-forge/pygmt-feedstock) [Done automatically by conda-forge's bot, but remember to pin SPEC0 versions]
- [ ] Bump PyGMT version on https://github.com/GenericMappingTools/try-gmt (after conda-forge update)
- [ ] Announce the release on:

>   - [ ] GMT [forum](https://forum.generic-mapping-tools.org/c/news/) (do this announcement first! requires moderator status)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - [ ] GMT [forum](https://forum.generic-mapping-tools.org/c/news/) (do this announcement first! Requires moderator status)
```
